This section corresponds to transaction [ITI-118] of the IHE Technical Framework. Transaction [ITI-118] is used by the Scheduling Client and Scheduling Server Actors. The Find Existing Appointments [ITI-118] transaction is used to search for existing appointments on the server.

### Scope

The Client [ITI-118] transaction requests a list of existing appointments from a Server.

### Actors Roles

**Table: Actor Roles**

|Actor | Role |
|-------------------+--------------------------|
| [Client](volume-1.html#client)    | Requests a list of appointments matching the supplied set of criteria (example: status, patient, service location, etc.) from the Scheduling Server. The Scheduling Client may choose to persist the information received, and/or render it for viewing |
| [Server](volume-1.html#server) | Returns information from appointments matching the supplied set of critieria provided by the Scheduling Client |

### Referenced Standards

**FHIR-R4** [HL7 FHIR Release 4.0 - Appointment](http://www.hl7.org/FHIR/R4/appointment.html)

### Interactions

<div>
{%include ITI-118-seq.svg%}
</div>
<br clear="all">

**Figure: Find Existing Appointments Interactions**


#### Find Exising Appointments Query request
This message uses the FHIR Search operation on the target Server endpoint to search for Appointment resources.

##### Trigger Events

When a Scheduling Client needs to needs to find existing appointments it issues a Find Existing Appointments query request.

##### Message Semantics

The Scheduling Client may use a GET or POST based search. The Scheduling Server shall support both GET and POST based [searches]( http://hl7.org/fhir/R4/http.html#search). The search target follows the FHIR http specification, addressing the [Appointment Resource](http://www.hl7.org/FHIR/R4/appointment.html) type.

```[base]/Appointment?<parameters>```

##### Search Parameters

**Table: Search Parameters**
|Parameter | Definition |
|-------------------+--------------------------|
|patient| This parameter of type ```reference``` identifies the patient actor participating in this appointment either by its fhir resource id (if known to the Scheduling Client, or by a business identifier known for this patient. In case of a business identifier it is strongly recommended to use both the identifying system and value (e.g. patient.identifier=<system>|<value>). If no <system> is supplied the Scheduling Server may use internal logic to interpret the <value>) |
|date| This parameter of type ```date``` defines the date range to search for appointments. Normal [date](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/search.html#date) prefixes apply. |
|practitioner| This parameter of type ```reference``` identifies the practitioner actor participating in this appointment either by its fhir resource id (if known to the Scheduling Client, or by a business identifier known for this practitioner. In case of a business identifier it is strongly recommended to use both the identifying system and value (e.g. practitioner.identifier=<system>|<value>). If no <system> is supplied the Scheduling Server may use internal logic to interpret the <value>) |
|status | This parameter of type ```token``` reflects the overall status of the appointment as defined in [AppointmentStatus](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/codesystem-appointmentstatus.html) |
|location |This parameter of type ```reference``` identifies the location actor participating in this appointment either by its fhir resource id (if known to the Scheduling Client, or by a name known for this location.|
|specialty|This parameter of type ```token``` identifies the specialty of a practitioner that would be required to perform the service requested in this appointment|

For example, search appointments for patient (identifier 12345), after October 21st, 2023 with practition (npi number: 12345678)
```GET https://server.example.com/fhir/4/Patient?patient.identifier=urn:oid:1.2.3.4.5|12345&date=gt20231021&practitioner.identifier=urn:oid:2.16.840.1.113883.4.6|12345678```

###### Patient Identifiers
Patient identifier shall be fully qualified and consist of an indentifier value and system (a.k.a. assigning authority or patient identity domain). Preferably identifier systems are identified with an OID value (e.g. urn:oid:1.2.3.4.5). Alternatively a URI value may be used (e.g. http://hl7.org/fhir/sid/us-ssn or http://hospital-1.org). 

In case the Scheduling Server is not able to process a identifier system in a Find Existing Appointments Query transaction it shall return a FHIR bundle of type ```searchset``` with 0 entries.

In case a Scheduling Client chooses to add multiple patient.identifiers to the Find Existing Appointments Query transaction the Scheduling Server shall evaluate all identifiers to find a matching patient. 

###### _count
A Scheduling Client may add a ```_count``` parameter to the Find Appointment Query request to limit the number of responses. 

###### _include
A Scheduling Client may add a ```_include_``` parameter to request a Scheduling Server to include participation actors (Patient, Practition, PractionerRole, RelatedPerson, Device, HealthcareService, or Location) in the response 


##### Expected Actions

**Table: Search parameter optionality**

|Parameter | Client | Server |
|----------+------+------|
|patient | O | R |
|date | O | R |
|practitioner | O | O |
|location | O | O |
|specialty | O | O |

The table above identifies the search parameters that are option or mandatory to support for both the Scheduling Client and Scheduling Server. In case a Scheduling Client issues a request with no parameters included the Scheduling Server may determine how to respond. For example, a valid response in such case would be a FHIR Bundle of type 'searchset' with zero entries, and including an operationOutcome stating it needs a minimal set of search parameters to be defined in the search request.
 

#### Find Appointments Query response

##### Trigger Events

The Scheduling Server has results or errors to report to the Scheduling Client. This may include 0, 1 or more appointments matching the search parameters specified by the Scheduling Client as a result of the Find Appointment Query request. This may include processing or security errors.

##### Message Semantics

The Find Appointments Query response sent from the Scheduling Server to the Scheduling Client consists of a FHIR Bundle of type ```searchset```. 

To limit the number of Appointment entries in the response bundle a Scheduling Server may choose to use [pagination](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/http.html#paging).

The Scheduling Server shall add a ```total``` attribute indicating the total number of appointments that match the Find Appointments Query request.

##### Expected Actions

The Scheduling Server shall make a best effort to add as many Appointment resource attributes in each Appointment entry returned. 

The Scheduling Server shall honour the ```_count``` request parameter when included in the Find Appointments Query request by a Scheduling Client

The Scheduling Server shall honour the ```_include``` request parameter for referenced participating actors (Patient, Practition, PractionerRole, RelatedPerson, Device, HealthcareService, and Location) when included in the Find Appointments Query request by a Scheduling Client.

##### Error codes

In the absence of any processing errors a http 200 (OK) error code is return

In case security constraints prevent a Scheduling Server from returning a response to the Scheduling Client a http 4xx error code is returned

**Table: Error Codes**
|Error Code | Description | Explanation |
|----------+------+------|
|400 | Bad Request | The server cannot or will not process the request due to an apparent client error |
|401 | Unauthorized | The server cannot or will not process the request due to an authorization issue with the request |
|403 | Forbidden | The server cannot or will not process the request because the Scheduling Client (or a user) is not authorized for the request |

The Scheduling Server may include an OperationOutcome to the response where it uses the values from the Error Codes table.

**Table: OperationOutcome Attributes**
|Attribute | Vaue | 
|----------+------|
| severity | Fatal |
| code | <http error description> |
| diagnostics | <http error explanation> 


### CapabilityStatement Resource

Server implementing this transaction shall provide a CapabilityStatement Resource as described in ITI TF-2x: Appendix Z.3 indicating the transaction has been implemented. 
* Requirements CapabilityStatement for [Client](CapabilityStatement-IHE.Scheduling.client.html)
* Requirements CapabilityStatement for [Server](CapabilityStatement-IHE.Scheduling.server.html)

### Security Considerations

See the general Security Consideration in [ITI TF-1: 38.5](https://profiles.ihe.net/ITI/PDQm/volume-1.html#1385-pdqm-security-considerations).

#### Security Audit Considerations

Both the Scheduling Server as Scheduling Client shall record audit events. 

##### Scheduling Client Audit 

The Scheduling Client shall be grouped with an [ATNA Secure Node or Secure Application (ATNA)](https://profiles.ihe.net/ITI/TF/Volume1/ch-9.html) Actor, and record a Find Appointment Query request according to the BALP basic profile for REST events - Execute as defined in [RESTful activities](https://profiles.ihe.net/ITI/BALP/content.html#3573-restful-activities)

##### Scheduling Server Audit 

The Scheduling Server shall be grouped with an [ATNA Secure Node or Secure Application (ATNA)](https://profiles.ihe.net/ITI/TF/Volume1/ch-9.html) Actor, and record a Find Appointment Query request according to the BALP basic profile for REST events - Execute as defined in [RESTful activities](https://profiles.ihe.net/ITI/BALP/content.html#3573-restful-activities)

### Other Profile Groupings

Both the Scheduling Client and Scheduling Server may be grouped with their respective [Internet User Authentication (IUA)](https://profiles.ihe.net/ITI/IUA/index.html) Actors. 