This section corresponds to transaction \[ITI-115\] of the IHE Technical Framework. Transaction \[ITI-115\] is used by the Scheduling Client and Scheduling Server Actors. The Find Potential Appointments \[ITI-115\] transaction is used to provide a set of parameters to the server, and based on them to get back a list of possible appointments.

### 2:3.115.1 Scope

The Find Potential Appointments \[ITI-115\] transaction allows a Scheduling Client to retrieve a list of available slots for potential appointments from a Scheduling Server based on certain search criteria.

### 2:3.115.2 Actors Roles

**Table 2:3.115.2-1: Actor Roles**

|Actor | Role |
|-------------------|--------------------------|
| [Scheduling Client](volume-1.html#client)    | Sends a "Find Potential Appointments" request to Server |
| [Scheduling Server](volume-1.html#server) | Receives and processes the "Find Potential Appointments" request and responds with 0, 1 or more potential appointment slots |
{: .grid}

### 2:3.115.3 Referenced Standards

**FHIR-R4** [HL7 FHIR Release 4.0](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/)

### 2:3.115.4 Messages
<div>
{%include ITI-115-seq.svg%}
</div>
<br clear="all">

**Figure 2:3.115.4-1: Find Potential Appointments Interactions**

#### 2:3.115.4.1 Find Potential Appointments Request
This transaction uses the `$find` operation as defined in the [Operation Definition](./OperationDefinition-appointment-find.html).

##### 2:3.115.4.1.1 Trigger Events

When a Scheduling Client needs to find potential slot to book a new appointment it issues a "Find Potential Appointments" request.

##### 2:3.115.4.1.2 Message Semantics
The Find Potential Appointment request is defined as a [FHIR Operation]({{site.data.fhir.path}}operations.html). Please see the corresponding [Operation Definition](./OperationDefinition-appointment-find.html).

###### 2:3.115.4.1.2.1 Request Parameters

The request parameters in the [table, which is part of the operation definition](OperationDefinition-appointment-find.html#root), are derived from search parameters defined for the [FHIR Appointment Resource]({{site.data.fhir.path}}appointment.html#search), and from additional functionally relevant entities, for example `organization` or `referral`.

**Example:**
The Scheduling Client uses an HTTP POST with the body containing the search parameter like this:

```
POST  [base]/Appointment/$find

{
    "resourceType": "Parameters",
    "parameter": [{
        "name": "start",
        "valueDateTime" : "2017-07-15T20:00:00Z"
    },
    {
        "name": "end",
        "valueDateTime" : "2017-07-17T20:00:00Z"
    },
    {
        "name": "practitioner",
        "valueReference": {"identifier": {"system":"urn:oid:1.3.6.1.4.1.19376.1.2.999", "value": "PR23143"},"display":"Dr. Pro Vider" }
    }]
}
```

##### 2:3.115.4.1.3 Expected Actions

Binding to CodeSets and ValueSets are expected to be localized. In no localization is available the Scheduling Client is expected to use a code from the: 

Note 1: [Practice Setting Code ValueSet](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/valueset-c80-practice-codes.html).

Note 2: [Appointment Reason Code ValueSet](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/v2/0276/index.html).

Note 3: [Service Category ValueSet](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/valueset-service-category.html).

Note 4: [Service Type ValueSet](https://hl7.org/fhir/R4/valueset-service-type.html).

The Scheduling Client shall support [FHIR Pagination]({{site.data.fhir.path}}http.html#paging) when the Scheduling Server paginates its response.

#### 2:3.115.4.2 Find Potential Appointments Response Message

##### 2:3.115.4.2.1 Trigger Events

Upon receiving a Find Potential Appointments request the Scheduling Server apply internal (business) logic to determine possible appointment (slots) that meet the search criteria specified by the Scheduling Client. The Scheduling Server returns a list of potential Appointment option the Scheduling Client can choose from to reserve or book an appointment.

##### 2:3.115.4.2.2 Message Semantics

The list of potential appointments is returned as a FHIR Bundle of type ```searchset```is returned containing 0, 1 or more Appointment resources. The details are in [the Bundle profile](./StructureDefinition-ihe-sched-avail-bundle.html). 


##### 2:3.115.4.2.3 Expected Actions
The Scheduling Server shall make a best effort to find potential Appointments. Each Appointment resource included in the response Bundle should me as complete as possible allowing the Scheduling Client to render the appointment information in such a way a (human) user is able to reserver or book an appointment.

The Scheduling Server shall honour the ```_count``` request parameter when included in the Find Appointments Query request by a Scheduling Client by limiting the number of potential appointments to match the ```_count``` value.

The Scheduling Server shall include a ```total``` attribute in the FHIR Bundle response indicating the total number of potential appointments it has determined. 

The Scheduling Server may use [pagination]({{site.data.fhir.path}}http.html#paging) allowing a Scheduling Client to page through the results.

##### 2:3.115.4.2.4 Error Codes

In the absence of any processing errors a http 200 (OK) error code is returned.

In case security or other constraints prevent a Scheduling Server from returning a response to the Scheduling Client a http 4xx error code is returned.

**Table 2:3.115.4.2.4-1: Error Codes**

|Error Code | Description | Explanation |
|-----------|-------------|-------------|
|400 | Bad Request | The server cannot or will not process the request due to an apparent client error |
|401 | Unauthorized | The server cannot or will not process the request due to an authorization issue with the request |
|403 | Forbidden | The server cannot or will not process the request because the Scheduling Client (or a user) is not authorized for the request |
{: .grid}

The Scheduling Server may include an OperationOutcome to the response where it uses the values from the Error Codes table.

**Table 2:3.115.4.2.4-1: OperationOutcome Attributes**

|Attribute | Value | 
|----------|------|
| severity | Fatal |
| code | \<http error description\> |
| diagnostics | \<http error explanation\> |
{: .grid}

### 2:3.115.5 CapabilityStatement Resource

Server implementing this transaction shall provide a CapabilityStatement Resource as described in ITI TF-2x: Appendix Z.3 indicating the transaction has been implemented. 
- Requirements CapabilityStatement for [Client](CapabilityStatement-IHE.Scheduling.client.html)
- Requirements CapabilityStatement for [Server](CapabilityStatement-IHE.Scheduling.server.html)

### 2:3.115.6 Security Considerations

See [IHE Scheduling Security Considerations](volume-1.html#security-considerations)

#### 2:3.115.6.1 Security Audit Considerations

''TODO: The security audit criteria ''

##### 2:3.115.6.2 Client Audit 

''TODO: the specifics''

##### 2:3.115.6.3 Server Audit 

''TODO: the specifics''
